If you like this, check out more at [farvalkorin.github.io/analyst](https://farvalkorin.github.io/analyst/index)

# The Intro

This post is for the 
[Amateur Overwatch Analyst Competition](https://www.reddit.com/r/Competitiveoverwatch/comments/8mqsdd/amateur_overwatch_coaching_and_analysis_contest/).

The prompt is as follows:

> Take a look at the Dallas Fuel's defense and create a sample analysis piece
that you could present to the Houston Outlaws (or any other team) in order to
explain how the composition functions, how the Dallas Fuel was positioned and
why, why the composition is strong on Hanamura A, and finally the overall
strengths and weakness of the strategy.

# The Game

The Overwatch game in question is a match between the Dallas Fuel and
Philadelpha Fusion. In particular, it is looking at Dallas Fuel's defense
against the Philadephia Fusion on Hanamura, with a focus on the first point. The
recording of the game can be found on the [Overwatch League
website](https://overwatchleague.com/en-us/match/10466/game/10019) and as a
[Twitch video](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/265968386). The Fuel defense starts
at 5:30 into the game.

As they currently stand, the Fusion have 21 wins and 13 losses overall and in
the top 5 teams in the league. The Fuel have 9 wins and 25 losses, a
disappointing record for a team that has always had a lot of promise. In
previous meetings between the two teams, Philadelphia had won 4-0 twice and 3-1
once. Coming into the match, the Fusion should have been the easy favorites to
win; however, there has been a major shift in the meta for the current stage.
This meant that, going into the game in particular, Dallas had a chance to catch
up to Philadelphia by being ahead of the curve identifying which heros worked
well together with the introduction of a new hero, Brigitte. In the game leading
up to the contest on Hanamura, Dallas beat Philadelphia in a convincing 3-1
fashion and would go on to win the full match 3-1 as well, dropping the control
point map Lijang Tower but ending the match with a win on Watchpoint: Gibraltar.

# Last Time

The last time these two teams met on Hanamura in Stage 2 of the Overwatch
League, Philadelphia won 2-1. Their lineup at the time included Neptuno (Lucio),
Boombox (Zenyatta), Fragi (Winston), Poko (DVa), Eqo (Genji) and Snillo
(Tracer). Dallas played with Custa (Ana), Chipsajen (Zenyatta), Taimou
(Winston), Mickie (DVa), Rascal (Genji) and Effect (Tracer).

Philly moved in on the attack by rotating left and diving across the point.
The Philly attack starts in earnest when Fragi kills Chipsajen (Zenyatta). Eqo
then kills Rascal (Genji) as he tries to use Dragon Blade, Snillo takes out
Custa (Ana) and Eqo kills Taimou (Winston). Rascal had killed Neptuno and Effect
kills Poko, but at that point Mickie also dies. Eqo pushes forward to prevent
any retake attempt and Philly takes Point A relatively easily.

# This Time

Both teams have new members playing in their Stage 4 matchup. Philly played
Neptuno and Boombox on support, with Eqo again on DPS; however, Carpe replaces
Snillo and the two tanks were switched out for Sado on main tank and Hotba on
off tank. Dallas swapped out their supports for HarryHook and Unkoe, OGE played
main tank and Seagull was swapped in for Rascal, with Taimou moving to a DPS
role.

# Hero Matchups and Compositions

## Dallas

### Comp 1: Triple Support with Reinhardt

Dallas starts off by running a triple support composition: HarryHook on Mercy,
Unkoe on Zenyatta, Mickie on Brigitte (3rd support or off tank depending on how
you look at it), Seagull on DVa and OGE on Reinhardt. Taimou plays Widow.

### Comp 2: Triple Support with Winston

Dallas moves to a triple support composition with Winstown during the third team
fight: HarryHook on Mercy, Unkoe on Zenyatta, Mickie on Brigitte (3rd support or
off tank depending on how you look at it), Seagull on DVa and OGE on Winston.
Taimou plays Widow.

## Philadelphia

### Comp 1: Double Sniper

Philly starts off by running a dive-y double sniper composition: Neptuno on
Mercy, Boombox on Zenyatta, Hotba on DVa and Sado on Winston. Carpe plays Widow
and Eqo plays Hanzo.

### Comp 2: Dive

Philly moves to a 2-2-2 dive composition after the second team fight: Neptuno on
Mercy, Boombox on Zenyatta, Hotba on DVa and Sado on Winston. Carpe plays Tracer
and Eqo plays Genji.

## Analysis

The original Dallas composition doesn't have a lot of shield break potential;
however, against a dive-y double sniper comp being run by Philly, it has a lot
of advantages. For one, Brigitte's shield, Rein's shield and DVa's defense
matrix can block a lot of the shots and limit the pick potential; additionally,
on Hanamura, Widow and Zenyatta can play away from the two choke points to make
it very hard for a dive to reach them, especially with a DVa to pressure the
high ground choke. Brigitte is an additional deterent to the Philly tanks; which
forces them to play outside her range for the most part. This means that the
attack relies on getting picks from one of a couple predictable angles by
snipers or otherwise maneuvering around the Dallas frontline in multiple steps
to avoid Brigitte and Rein. Supportwise, Mercy and Zenyatta are ok; however,
compared to the last meeting of these two teams on Hanamura, the Zenyatta is
much more likely to get stranded. Previously, Philly ran a Lucio, which could
help the Zenyatta move through the choke if needed. This time, the Zenyatta is
stuck as by far the least mobile hero. Ultimates-wise, Philly never had a solid
team-wipe ultimate or combo. A Graviton-Dragon Strike might have been an option,
but Dallas ended up playing somewhat split.

When Philly switched to dive after the second fight, they committed to taking a
longer route to try and jump in and pick heros. This works for a moment when
Eqo's Genji picks Taimou's Widowmaker; however, Taimou is immediately
resurrected. From there, the dive ends up falling apart as Dallas is able to
sustain with the help of their defensive ultimates long enough to pick out the
Tracer and dive tanks. The last push was shut down primarily by the Brigitte
taking out the Genji Blade and DVa's defense matrix shutting out the Pulse Bomb
(I think?). This further reinforces the hypothesis that the Dallas defense was
set up to be anti-dive, with good cooldown management to shut down the
effectiveness of potentially game-changing ults from Philly.

For the most part, I don't think that changing to Winston hampered the
effectivness of Dallas's triple support comp; however, it did remove the large
blue rectangle blocking damage in the choke in favor of pressure from OGE's
Tesla Cannon and mobility.

# Team Fights

## Team Fight 1

### Summary

On the first attack, Taimou picks off Neptuno, removing Philly's resurrect from
the equation. Seagull kills Carpe and pops Hotba out of the DVa mech, ending the
first push.

### Analysis

Dallas convincingly wins this fight, largely with the first pick on the Mercy
(Neptuno). If Neptuno stays alive longer, he can resurrect Carpe on Widow and
may be able to keep Hotba in mech long enough to push in. At the time of the
pick on Carpe, Hotba had moved in on DVa but both Winston and Hanzo were still
at the choke.

## Team Fight 2

### Ult Economy

Coming into the second team fight, Dallas leads the ultimate economy. Seagull
has 83% ult charge and both supports have more than 60% charge after topping up
the team and assisting on a kill and the demech. Taimou is about half way to
Infrasight. OGE and Mickie are both less than a third of the way to their
ultimates.

Carpe has 50% charge to Widow's Infrasight and both of the Philladelphia
supports have 50% ult charge. Eqo and Sado are all below a third of the way to
their ultimates. Hotba loses all ult charge to remech.

Leading into the fight, neither team will have ults to initiate; however,
Seagull will likely get ult and both support lines may likely to get their
defensive ults as well; however, they may or may not get used based on the
timing relative to the pace of the fight.

### Summary

The fight starts with a Philly dive through the top window onto HarryHook and
Seagull. HarryHook escapes and Seagull backs up. Sado jumps to the point;
however, just after this, Seagull uses self destruct and ends up killing
Neptuno. Seagull chases Sado down on point and kills the Winston. This leaves
Hanzo and Zenyatta outside the choke for Philly and Widow and DVa split inside
the choke. Seagull chases down Carpe, and the fight ends when Hotba leaves, this
time keeping the DVa mech.

### Analysis

Neptuno gets picked again, this time on a positioning mistake.
This leaves the team out of its main source of healing and a resurrect.
In what appears to be an attempt to pull Dallas out of position, Sado moves to
the point; however, either by lack of coordination or lack of cooldowns, Winston
is stranded by his team on the point.
This leads to him getting focused down alone by Seagull in a position that would
have been borderline un-resurrectable, even if the team was in a position to
push. Dallas again takes the fight when neither of the Dallas supports get
focused down and the team can't make it passed the choke or find picks.

Based on the ult economy, one would expect Dallas to come out ahead on this
fight; however, there was ample room for Philly to get a pick and swing the
fight the other way before ultimates came online or by generating an ultimate of
their own. Instead, the combined front lines of OGE/Mickie (Reinhardt/Brigitte)
holding the main choke and Seagull/HarryHook (DVa/Mercy) holding the high ground
entrance keep taking space for the Zenyatta/Widowmaker back line and putting
pressure on the snipers of Philly. This space allows for the Zen/Widow combo to
avoid getting picked and eventually begins the end of the push when Sado caught
out of position.

## Team Fight 3

### Ult Economy

Entering the third team fight, Dallas is in a pretty good position. Taimou
nearly has Infrasight, HarryHook has Valkyrie and Unkoe has Transcendence.
Mickie is 90% of the way to Rally and Seagull is already 40% of the way back to
his ult after using at the beginning of the last fight. OGE has been holding the
main choke and lags behind at 60% of the way to Earthshatter.

Philly ends up swapping to a 2-2-2 dive comp, with Carpe and Eqo switching to
Tracer and Genji respectively. This resets their ult charge, leaving the team
with two support ults. Sado and Hotba are both about 70% of the way to their
tank ults. Tracer's ultimate in particular can charge quickly so it may be used
in the fight, but only if the fight drags on.

Leading into the fight, Philly doesn't have any offensive ultimates; however,
they may chose to engage with Valkyrie. This gives them the option to use
Transcendence as a defense against a possible shatter or to protect a resurrect;
however, with a Widow in place, it won't prevent a pick by itself. Both Primal
Rage and Self-Destruct can be used to stall the point or make space; however,
with just under 2 minutes, I'd expect Philly to hold on to these ultimates for a
final push.

Dallas no longer has to worry about holding a defensive ult for a Dragon Strike,
so they can use Transcendence or Valkyrie to sustain the team during a fight or
protect a dive target (potentially themselves). I expect Taimou to use the
Infrasight when it comes up because he no longer has to worry about countering
an enemy Widow's Infrasight; however, it can also be used later to seek out the
enemy team on a later push when their positions aren't yet known. Rally will
likely be used leading into a fight to build up team armor.

### Summary

Mickie leads with Rally for Dallas. Philly dives in with Valkyrie, again towards
Seagull in an attempt to move left. In
the poke and dive, Sado builds Primal and uses it to keep himself alive.
Transcendence gets used by Unkoe to save himself from being focused during the
Primal Rage, and he moves to heal up his tanks and position near Mickie
(Brigitte). This pushes Winston and the Philly supports back outside the main
choke. While this is happening, Eqo finds Taimou, but HarryHook immediately
resurrects the Widow. Hotba finds OGE and Carpe is killed by Taimou.

HarryHook uses Valkyrie, so the fight is now Dallas minus OGE versus Philly
without Carpe where Eqo (Genji) and Neptuno (Mercy) are low health. HarryHook
finishes off Neptuno, but Sado finds and kills Unkoe. At this point, OGE swaps
to Winston to make it back tot the point faster. Taimou finds a pick on Sado as
he tries to jump away and Hotba gets de-meched by Seagull.

### Analysis

Leading into the fight, Dallas is again in a good position to win based on the
ult economy. Philly has given up their offensive ultimates in favor of a new
comp, so Dallas is in a good position to harden up their defense with Rally to
sustain themselves (especially their supports) through the next fight. The
Philly dive is more coordinated, although it comes from the main choke instead
of diving blindly through the top window; however, Seagull is again positioned
to pressure the dive. Based on Philly's strategy from the last time these two
teams played, it appears that they are attempting to take the long way around to
the left of the point. This was successful last time (in Stage 2), but Dallas is
better positioned to threaten it this time. Additionally, Hotba on DVa ends up
stuck at the main choke (potentially because of a Mickie/Brigitte stun?).

Philly is able to force out the Transcendence in this fight, but it comes after
being forced into using Primal Rage and Transcendence and using Valkyrie to
engage. Primal Rage is enough of a distraction to
find a pick on Taimou, but it gets immediately resurrected. If Carpe doesn't get
killed at this point in the fight, Philly appears to be in an ok position. Their
DPS are through the choke, they finally have their Mercy alive for the fight,
and they take out OGE when he was left alone at the main choke. They do push
through, but Eqo is met by Mickie, Carpe is dead and the supports are picked
off. This means that Unkoe's death doesn't mean much for the dive and the attack
falls apart.

Ultimates wise, Dallas again should have won this fight with 3 defensive
ultimates to put to use. Philly does gain ground in the ultimate economy
when Dallas spends Valkyrie, Transcendence and Rally. Philly spends Primal Rage
and Self Destruct as well as Valkyrie, which they use to engage (as predicted,
I'll have you know I said that before I'd watched the VOD) and Transcendence. I
honestly can't tell why they used Transcendence or what effect it had, it
potentially sustains the tanks long enough to kill OGE, but they weren't taking
damage when the ult was used.

## Team Fight 4

### Ult Economy

With 15 seconds left, Dallas has Seagull's Self-Destruct. The next closest
ultimate is Rally, which is about 30% away and may come up during the fight.

Philly has Dragon Blade and will have Pulse Bomb. Sado is about 60% of the way
to another Primal Rage. Hotba has to remech and shouldn't have his ult during
the fight. If Philly can get a pick or two with Pulse Bomb and/or Dragon Blade,
they may be able to clean up and secure the point.

### Summary

After the dive, Eqo opens up the fight with his Dragon Blade; however, Mickie
finds him almost immediately and shuts him down with a shield bash and whip
(with a little help from a Discord Orb). This gives him Rally, which he
immediately uses. OGE finds a kill on Neptuno, and the fight is pretty much over
at this point. It looks like Carpe's Pulse Bomb got eaten by DVa's matrix (or
whiffed?), Mickie picks off the Boombox with another whip, Taimou gets Carpe and
Hotba gets de-meched. Sado doesn't make it to Primal and dies trying to get to
the point in overtime.

### Analysis

<!-- TODO(farvalkorin): not necessarily this fight, but does one person enter the fight late or
early consistently? is this a common problem? Question to think about for analysis -->
<!-- TODO(farvalkorin): make sure analysis isn't a replay of the summary/replay -->

Philly has the ultimate advantage to take the final fight; however, critically,
they don't have any sustain ultimates left (I'm broadly including Primal Rage
and Self Destruct for remech as sustain here). In this last fight, the strengths
of the Dallas composition as an anti-dive comp come through. The cooldown
abilities of Brigitte (shield bash/whip), DVa (defense matrix) and Zenyatta
(discord orb) shine through and shut down what otherwise could have been game
changing ultimates. 

# Overall Analysis

This section more directly addresses the analyst prompt above.

## How does this composition work?

The Dallas composition is playing a split composition that counters what I see
as three major trends in Overwatch: dive, double sniper comps and Hanzo/Zarya
wombo-combos. These three aren't necessarily exclusive, as seen by Philly
running a dive-y double-sniper composition (Zarya was also run in dive at one
point iirc).

The Dallas composition works against dive because it allows Dallas's front line
to take lots of space and make it hard for a dive to get to their back line.
While Mickie on Brigitte is a dive counter and was involved in breaking up many
of the plays attempted by Philly, I would argue that, on a different map or if
Taimou and Unkoe positioned differently, the dive could have rotated out of
Mickie's range and he would have been ineffective in the position he played.
Later, when the fights condense onto the point, Brigitte as an anti-dive hero
starts to shine: she can stun/whip Genji and control the dive tanks particularly
well. Especially when Philly switches to what I consider a stereotypical 2-2-2
dive, the Dallas composition shines because the cooldowns available (stun,
defense matrix come to mind) are good counters to both the typical play and
ultimates of the dive DPS (Dragon Blade and Pulse Bomb, respectively).

The Dallas composition also works well against a double sniper composition and a
dive-y one in particular. Reinhardt, DVa, Brigitte and later Winston are all
hard targets to burst down before a support can prop them up, especially with
a Rein shield cutting off some of the angles. Unkoe can play back at the range
of his Discord Orb and HarryHook can play at safe angles to support his team
with minimal risk of getting picked off.

The Dallas composition also works well against a potential Zarya/Hanzo ultimate
combo offense. The team plays very spread out (except to gather for Rally) and
there isn't a lot of spam damage from a Junkrat or Pharah that would easily
charge up a Zarya. DVa can be an ult battery for Zarya, but on the other hand a
well timed defense matrix can eat the Graviton.
This means that the combo would likely come up infrequently
and it doesn't pair well with Philly's otherwise mobile tank lineup. If they had
switched to a Rein/Zarya composition, they could have challenged Reinhardt and
Brigitte in the choke, but the pair of them can cause big problems for an
offensive Rein that doesn't also have his own Brigitte to back him up.

This composition isn't a generic antidote to dive or other comps, but based on
how Dallas was able to position on Hanamura, their composition was effective.

## Why Hanamura A? Dallas Fuel Positioning

Hanamura A is one of the most restricted entrances to a first point on 2CP maps.
There is the wider main choke and the high dive window, but at that particular
wall, that is the only way in (short of flying a Pharah all the way over the
top). If a team can hold the main choke and pressure or hold the high window,
they can effectively shut out a less mobile team or split out a mobile team
whose supports can't make the jump (Zenyatta, I'm looking at you).

![View of 2 chokepoints on Hanamura Point A, with the doors
highlighted](hanamuraA1_paths.jpg?raw=true "Image originally from https://images.eurogamer.net/2016/metabomb/hanamurasniping6.jpg")

From these first two points, there are 3 main ways to reach the point: a small
room to the attacker's right, traveling across open space directly to the point,
or taking the long way behind the buildings to the attacker's left.

Dallas's general strategy was to split into pairs. Reinhardt and Brigitte held
the main choke (for much of the game), DVa and Mercy held the high ground
entrance and Zenyatta and Widow played back, using their lack of falloff to deal
damage and make any dive expensive, in terms of cooldowns and time, to reach
them. Later, when OGE is picked off and returns as Winston, he again positions
forward with DVa and Mickie rotates back to more of a backline peel role on
the point, making a dive onto supports even more challenging. 

In the section above about the different composition counters, I don't talk much
about DVa in how she specifically
counters Philly's comps; however, on Hanamura A her mobility in general and her
vertical mobility in particular shines. DVa is the reason that Philly can
contest the high window with essentially two players (with HarryHook on the
heals/damage boost). Seagull ends up flying all over the map, dealing with
snipers, tanks and healers throughout the game. DVa and Mercy are also in a
position to drop easily to the main choke to support the Rein/Brigitte as
needed, or, during this game, avoid the dive and damage.

This positioning
controls both the two main chokes as well as making it easy to defend the 3
potential attack paths if the other team makes it through the choke. The room to
the attacker's right is a nightmare for most any team comp. The room is an
enclosed space where there are two heros with hammers that can swing away, CC
and have sustain through Brigitte's passive heal (her abilities are almost
guarunteed to hit in the small space) and her armor pack for Reinhardt. In the
worst case, Rein's shield can block almost all damage coming through
the small doorway. The only way I'd want to make it much worse would be to add a
Junkrat.

This leaves the open space in the middle of the point and the longer left flank.
When Taimou is hitting his shots and is generally uncontested, this is a
nightmare for a comp that is not significantly more beefy than what Philly
selected. At times, even Sado on Winston couldn't cross the space fast enough.

In the end, the left flank is probably the most viable option if the healers can
get through the door (as seen the last time these two teams played). Based on
how Dallas was positioned, they don't have a bunch of players overloading this
side, but the team can relatively easily rotate their positioning to counter
this kind of push, especially with the visibility and pressure from Seagull on
DVa. 

Based on how Dallas positioned, they also controlled all of the sightlines from
the start. On a different map, there is the opportunities for snipers to appear
from many different positions; however, on Hanamura, there are really two
windows of opportunity. The Dallas Reinhardt positioning shuts down almost the
entire main choke, but still allows Taimou to take shots at players positioned
there. The DVa on high ground also limits the effectiveness of snipers that sit
in or move through the high ground window. During the game, Carpe was never
actually killed by Taimou, but he was never able to get picks because he was
constantly saught out by Seagull.

## Composition Weaknesses

### Individual Heros

The composition works well on Hanamura A; however, it isn't invulnerable and I think that the Philadelphia call to switch to a full dive was suboptimal. The Dallas composition revolves around the new hero Brigitte and her synergy with Reinhardt. This allows Dallas to contest the choke with two heros and make lots of space for their back line. Common counters to Brigitte include Junkrat and Pharah. I think that potentially swapping the old-patch Hanzo for one of these heros would have provided a lot of value for pressuring Rein and Brigitte. One might also argue to switch the Widow, but I think that, at least at the OWL level, taking a Widow v. Widow duel is a viable option. Additionally, Widow is another DPS hero that can provide value outside Brigitte's range.

Another aspect of the Philly attack that was limited was the mobility and vulnerability of their Zenyatta. For the most part, Philly also doesn't get value out of their ressurects on Mercy because Neptuno gets picked early; therefore, I propose swapping out the Mercy for a Lucio. As an individual swap, the Lucio could have provided more value with the speed boost than Mercy did with resurrect and damage boost.

### Compositions

As a more whole-scale swap, I think that moving to a more grounded composition to pressure the main choke would have been a more successful attack against this very split team. I propose swapping to Reinhardt, DVa, Widow, Junkrat, Zenyatta, Mercy. Reinhardt would allow for the team to pressure the main choke directly with Junkrat providing extra shield pressure that Dallas couldn't match. DVa provides some vertical mobility to challenge high ground and protect supports; otherwise, Dallas could shoot fish in a barrel from high ground. Widow's role would mainly be to counter the enemy Widow and force Dallas supports to be more hesistant and careful while looking for picks on said supports. In this case, I think that the Mercy remains a solid choice because resurrect can provide value and the team won't be wholesale shifting its center of mass as quickly.

This composition with Reinhardt and DVa has a couple of ultimates that can set up a team for a wipe to clear the first point. A Reinhardt Earthshatter combined with a DVa bomb or a Junkrat Riptire can provide a wipe combination. The tire and shatter can also be used individually and get value. In particular, Hanamura A is a good point where there are lots of walls and vertical space for the tire to get close to a team (supports especially) without leaving it too vulnerable to destruction. 

DVa could also be replaced by the Zarya for her ultimate; however, I think that Zarya would have a harder time getting charge and with spread positioning by Dallas, the Graviton would likely be less effective. Brigitte could also be a good choice for more of an off-tank role and to open up opportunities for stuns to insta-break Rein's shield and pick off the main tank. She also allows for counter-play against Mickie's Brigitte.

Mercy can also be replaced with a Lucio for increased mobility; however, I still see value in a resurrect, especially in the face of an enemy Widow. The third swap from the recommended composition is to drop the explicit DPS and instead favor a tank heavy composition with an attack Brigitte.

This last tank heavy, anti-sniper comp after a couple of switches is pretty much what San Francisco Shock ran against Dallas in [their match on Hanamura](https://overwatchleague.com/en-us/match/10471/game/10058). They ran Lucio, Zenyatta, Brigitte, DVa, Zarya and Reinhardt. This let them take Point A on Hanamura twice against the same composition that Dallas used to hold Philly.

# Recommendation for Houston Outlaws

I'd recommend that Houston Outlaws go Rein, Zarya, Junkrat, Widow, Mercy, Zenyatta. It's a composition that they've run (or close to it) before and it plays to their strengths. If Zarya isn't providing value, they can switch to a DVa. The win condition for not getting full held is clear and if that doesn't work there are viable switches that can be made that don't ruin the entire ult economy.

I think that my recommendation also fits the Houston Outlaws past play styles and strengths and counters the heros and composition of Dallas. They can force their way through the choke, likely picking off the Dallas Reinhardt or forcing him to retreat and then force the fight to the point on Hanamura, where a Grav-Riptire combo could be deadly and effective for breaking a first point hold.
