If you like this, check out more at [farvalkorin.github.io/analyst](https://farvalkorin.github.io/analyst). For more GOATs content, check out [farvalkorin.github.io/analyst/goats](https://farvalkorin.github.io/analyst/goats).

# Welcome to the Zoo

The composition commonly known as Goats (and probably should be known as 3-3) has become an often played composition in today's competitive Overwatch scene. If you've heard the name but not seen it before, it breaks down as follows: The team runs 3 tanks (conventionally Reinhardt, Zarya and DVa) and 3 supports (conventionally Moira, Lucio and Brigitte). The composition favors enclosed spaces and brawling on point as opposed to poke battles at long range, and it has mobility from Lucio's speed boost, but it doesn't have the vertical jump of a typical dive comp.

The composition has become a standard of sorts for teams to pull out when they either don't have a better idea of what to run or they feel they are in a situation where the enemy team isn't prepared to stop it. Some people love it, some people hate it, and lots of people are trying to figure it out and figure out how to fight it. Some people just give up and mirror match. The composition's ubiquity has also changed what strategies are viable. Any team that plays a composition that is vulnerable to GOATs is very vulnerable because the opposing team can swap onto GOATs and quickly overwhelm the team that's too stationary to resist (often the defending team).

# How does 3-3 even work?

There aren't even any DPS around?? It's not 2-2-2??

3-3 operates on a tightly knit group of heroes that play together, and when they all speed boost onto you, there's little you can do about it. The first strength of 3-3 is the health pool. Reinhardt, Zarya and DVa stack up a lot of health and are very hard to burst down. Additionally, Reinhardt and Brigitte have shields at their disposal, DVa has defense matrix and Zarya has bubbles to save the day. This makes it easier on the Moira, who can output lots of area of effect healing and enable the team's aggression. Lucio is a key piece of that aggression. His speed boost makes it so that Reinhardt and the rest of the team can go from cover to on top of you and use their abilities in the blink of an eye.

What can the team do with all that healing and time? Output lots of mostly unblockable damage in a focused area. Reinhardt and Brigitte have unblockable damage with their melee (and firestrike). Zarya's beam can't be eaten and when she's at high charge, she should be feared. DVa's damage can technically be blocked, eaten or bubbled, but at the right time DVa can get in close and use her missles to burst down an unsuspecting target. Lucio and Moira don't have as impressive of a stat sheet, but their primary roles are elsewhere anyway.

One thing to note here is that 3-3's plan, at least in the conventional sense, doesn't involve any ultimates at this stage. The composition functions very well together from the first fight to the last. When ultimates do come online, the team gets even stronger. DVa and Reinhardt can combine for Shatter-Bombs, or a well placed DVa bomb can get into the center of a graviton and wipe a team. Moira's ultimate also combines well with a grouped team and a Graviton. Brigitte's Rally armor makes the team even more resilient going into a fight, and Sound Barrier can be used to keep a team alive even when all hope seems to be lost. Perhaps the best example of this was where a team (I'm forgetting who right now, oops) actually got themselves Earthshattered in order to bait the other team in, then used a Lucio Soundbarrier so that no one died from the follow up and re-engaged with the enemy team on the back foot.

# How does 3-3 not work?

Hopefully, I've done a wonderful job convincing you that you should only run 3-3 for the rest of the time you have Overwatch installed. The composition does have some weaknesses. For one, all that healing means that the team is soaking up absurd ammounts of damage, and the enemy team that can delay the end of the first fight long enough will have DPS ultimates every fight. Junkrat is a common counter-pick where he can build a RIP-tire in absurdly short periods of time. Pharah functions in a similar way, but from a height at which everyone except the DVa can't reach. From a tanking perspective, its often the choice to pick a Reinhardt and Zarya of your own to block some of the damage, but allow for enough mobility (Orisa, I'm calling you out here) to kite back when 3-3 expends cooldowns to rush in. On the right maps, (I'm thinking of King's Row here), DVa can work wonders by contesting a point, returning to high ground and getting re-healed, then rinse-repeat. The longer the tanks on the not 3-3 team can survive, the more time their DPS have to get picks and build ultimates. This kind of fight can come down to 2 percent of ultimate charge where the DPS gets the team-wipe ultimate first or the opposing tanks get overwhelmed and 3-3 takes the objective on the first try.

# Still Interested?

I'm going to do a more in depth, quantitative analysis of each hero, their strengths and how they contribute to the composition. In addition, I'm going to break down how to break 3-3 piece by piece. Given enough Nano Cola, I'm going to get into how metas are made, where the meta could be, and how to balance the game.
